'Largest-ever' climate-change march rolls through NYC

The U.N. says 125 nations will be represented. It's the first time in five years that world leaders have gathered to discuss climate change.

The U.N. summit aims to get world leaders to pledge emission cuts that could become part of a global agreement to be approved at U.N. climate talks next year in Paris.

Secretary of State John Kerry will deliver keynote remarks at the summit's opening event. He will showcase climate action that the USA is taking at home and present his vision for advancing a global low carbon economy, his office said Sunday.

The People's Climate March and the summit are part of Climate Week NYC, an annual event "to get people together to make the business case for climate action," said Sylvain Biville of the Climate Group, which organizes the week. The Climate Group's goal is "a prosperous, low-carbon future," which the group says will be achieved by "a rapid scale-up of low carbon energy and technology."

This year's Climate Week events follow a series of scientific reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change that conclude global warming is "unequivocal" and that it is extremely likely that human activity has been the dominant cause since the mid-20th century.

According to the IPCC, the world is on a path to exceed a 3.6-degree Fahrenheit rise in temperature, the limit that countries have set to ensure that the world would not suffer the worst effects of climate change.

On the streets of New York on Sunday, the marchers were led by indigenous groups from around the world. Organizers say many of these indigenous people are often the first victims of climate change.

At 12:58 p.m., protesters raised their hands above their heads and quieted for a moment of silence to honor them.

Ezra Silk, 25, of Portland, Maine, said the USA has to take action on climate change if it wants to protect the nation's democracy. He pointed to Syria as an example of how climate change can contribute to a country's collapse.

"There was the worst drought in its modern history," said Silk, co-founder of The Climate Mobilization, which advocates a World War II-scale intervention on climate change. "It caused a major upheaval when all the farmers came into the cities. There was a tyrant, who then oppressed his people, a civil war broke out, destabilizing the entire region, and a group like ISIS has come to the forefront. I mean that's the embodiment of what America is not about, and that's what collapse of civilization would look like."

Many families brought their children to the march, pointing to them as the reason the tide must change.

Robyn Moore, 39, was at the rally with her husband, Martin Moore, 40, their daughter, Charlotte, 4, and son, Henry, 15 months. Charlotte wore a simple drawing of the earth around her neck, her hair adorned with leaves.

"We're here as a family for the future of our kids," she said.

Charlotte Moore, 4, at the . She and her parents are marching for her future.

— Alia E. Dastagir (@alia_e)

Contributing: Doyle Rice in McLean, Va., and Larry Copeland in Atlanta

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1sfugYB

Watch what happened off-camera at the Oscars

Feb 23, 2015