Obama: 'The shadow of crisis has passed'

Obama also echoed long-standing legislative proposals that included new road and bridge projects, a higher minimum wage, equal pay laws for women, and increased money for basic research, including a new "Precision Medicine Initiative" devoted to fighting diseases like cancer and diabetes.

In a swipe at the Keystone project, Obama asked lawmakers to "set our sights higher than a single oil pipeline," and pass a bigger infrastructure bill.

On the foreign policy front, Obama again promised to veto new congressional sanctions against Iran, saying they would ruin ongoing negotiations over that nation's nuclear program.

Obama illustrated some of his themes by telling the stories of guests the White House invited to view the speech from the presidential box.

"Will we accept an economy where only a few of us do spectacularly well?" Obama said. "Or will we commit ourselves to an economy that generates rising incomes and chances for everyone who makes the effort?"

An upbeat president also disputed cynics who say the nation remains too divided, telling Congress: "I still believe that, together, we can do great things, even when the odds are long."

Watch all the highlights of President Obama's 2015 State of the Union Address.

1 of 20

USA TODAY's Shannon Rae Green talks with Politics Editor Paul Singer about how likely Obama's proposals for tax credits for child care, breaks for community college student and more bipartisan deals are to pass in a Republican-controlled Congress.

2 of 20

How many of the proposals President Obama mentioned in his State of the Union address have a chance at passing? USA TODAY White House Reporter Gregory Korte talks about what makes this year's address unique.

3 of 20

Iowa Republican Senator Joni Ernst delivers the GOP's response to President Obama's State of the Union Address.

4 of 20

During his one hour State of the Union Address, President Obama had a few lighter moments when he showed off his sense of humor.

5 of 20

Rep. Curt Clawson's Tea Party response to President Obama's State of the Union Address tackles personal liberty and immigration issues.

6 of 20

Junius Randolph interviews social media producer Ryan Carey-Mahoney about tonight's State of the Union address

7 of 20

"The shadow of crisis has passed, and the State of the Union is strong," said President Obama during his 2015 State of the Union Address.

8 of 20

In his State of the Union Address, President Obama confronted race relations related to Ferguson and New York City shootings.

9 of 20

USA TODAY's Shannon Rae Green goes over the State of the Union Address highlights with USA TODAY Washington Bureau Chief Susan Page.

10 of 20

During President Obama's 2015 State of the Union Address, he had one especially memorable moment when he mentioned that he had no more campaigns to run.

11 of 20

President Obama addresses the cynicism that he has faced over the past six years that he has been in office, but he says "the cynics are wrong."

12 of 20

During President Obama's 2015 State of the Union Address, he described a plan he will send to Congress to lower the cost of community college to zero, and reduce the monthly payments of already existing student loans.

13 of 20

During President Obama's 2015 State of the Union Address, he described America's growing economy and rising wages, but said middle-class economic policies work as long as politics don't get in the way.

14 of 20

During President Obama's 2015 State of the Union Address, he called on Congress to "show the world that we are united in this mission by passing a resolution to authorize the use of force against ISIL."

15 of 20

President Barack Obama vowed in the State of the Union address Tuesday to relentlessly hunt down terrorists from "Pakistan to the streets of Paris," then called on Congress to approve new war powers against Islamic State militants. (Jan. 20)

16 of 20

President Obama stressed the country's values in his State of the Union Address, urging people to reject offensive stereotypes and condemning the persecution of minorities.

17 of 20

As we look towards the coming century, President Obama said that "no foreign nation, no hacker, should be able to shut down our networks, steal our trade secrets, or invade the privacy of American families, especially our kids."

18 of 20

Take a look back at President Obama's last five State of the Union speeches to see the similarities and differences.

19 of 20

Joni Ernst, a freshman Iowa senator, is the first new senator the GOP has ever chosen to give a State of the Union rebuttal.

20 of 20

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1J89DjO

Will ice, snow shut down the South...again?

Feb 25, 2015